=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Source Name: Gibraltar Chronicle - Treaty drafting progressing ‘very positively and very well’ CM says
Source Date: 2025-09-09
Source Link: https://www.chronicle.gi/category/brexit/
Created At:  2025-12-08T07:56:25.140Z
Qdrant ID:   1765180584073
Chunks:      4
========================
Treaty drafting progressing ‘very positively and very well’, CM says

Legal drafting on the text of the UK/EU treaty on Gibraltar is “progressing very positively and very well”, Chief Minister Fabian Picardo said, adding the goal remains to have it completed by the autumn.

In an interview with the Chronicle ahead of National Day, the Chief Minister reflected on the complexity of the treaty negotiation, as well as on contentious domestic matters including the 2018/19 Principal Auditor’s report and the McGrail Inquiry.

And on his plan to step back from frontline politics, Mr Picardo said he would not “countenance leaving” until the treaty had been ratified and implemented, a process he said would likely take “the lion’s share of the rest of this term”.

The negotiation about Gibraltar’s post-Brexit future, Mr Picardo said, was “by far” the most important issue facing the people of Gibraltar “in generations”.
(Continued on page 2)

(Continued from front page)

While it was “impossible to say” when the treaty would be ratified, the Chief Minister stressed all sides remained committed to getting it done soonest.

“What you have is genuine goodwill on the part of all parties to try and achieve it as soon as is technically possible,” he said.

Mr Picardo said negotiators had achieved a balance “few could have imagined was likely” and that he sensed most people in Gibraltar were “very comfortable” following the June 11 political announcement that a political agreement for the treaty had been secured.

He acknowledged that for most people, that optimism came with caution and a natural desire to see the detail of the treaty text once it is available.

But he insisted there would be no surprises in the document, even if its language might at times feel uncomfortable given decades of often fractious relations between Gibraltar and Spain.

“One of the things that has come across in peripheral comment in Gibraltar, but widespread comment in Spain, is that people say they don’t know the detail of the treaty,” he said. “And what I’ve been pains to explain to people is that, actually, you know all of the detail.”

“There is going to be nothing in the treaty that we haven’t told you about.”

“What is being written down is the technical text to deal with all of the things that we have told you.”

“There are no things that we haven’t told you that are going to be in there, other than the mechanics of giving effect to everything we have said.”

“There are no secret aspects that we haven’t yet disclosed that are going to be in the treaty text.”

‘UNCOMFORTABLE’

As both he and UK Government ministers have done on numerous occasions – most recently Europe Minister Stephen Doughty in evidence to the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee on Monday – the Chief Minister stressed the treaty had no impact on sovereignty.

“We are all naturally very suspect of anything that mentions the word Spain,” Mr Picardo said. “But Spain is now the Schengen gateway state, and in many instances [in the legal text], the reference will have to be to Spain as the Schengen instrument of the Schengen member states.”

“So that’s uncomfortable, but it’s not in any way sovereignty suspect.”

“There are no sovereignty suspect aspects that will creep into that text because we would not agree a text that had any sovereignty suspect aspect to it.”

Mr Picardo said too that there were no “sticking points” in the drafting of the legal text.

Any discussions around the process were focused on technical aspects and “what text works best”.

“I’ll be very frank with you, the geometry of how views are taken is very often not as you would expect,” he said.

“Very often, Gibraltar and Spain may actually think that the text works well and it may be the European Commission that might have a view that, because this is a European text, it has to be expressed in a certain way.”

“But these are very technical issues. These are not political disagreements.”

OCTOBER

The Chief Minister acknowledged the timeline signalled by Spain’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, who in recent weeks has told Spanish media that completion of the treaty is expected by October.

But he said too that the process was complex and included ensuring nothing in the Gibraltar treaty contradicted other international legal obligations for the higher contracting parties, namely the UK and the EU.

“That’s what we all want to achieve,” Mr Picardo said of the October target.

“Will we achieve it? We hope so.”

One issue that all parties are keeping a close eye on is the introduction of the EU’s automated border control system, known as the Entry/Exit System.

EU countries will commence a phased rollout of the EES as from October 12 and there is concern that any implementation at the border could impact fluidity while the Gibraltar treaty is being finalised and subsequently ratified by the UK and EU parliaments.

The Chief Minister said all sides were keen to avoid any disruption at the border, where interim measures have been in place for some years while the treaty negotiation was under way.

“We’re working to avoid any issues arising as a result of the implementation [of the EES],” Mr Picardo said.

“I am confident that today, it looks like we’ll be able to avoid any of those issues.”

“But in the end, until you’ve got ratification and actual implementation, many things could go wrong.”

DOMESTIC CONTROVERSY

Mr Picardo was speaking to the Chronicle ahead of what will likely be fierce exchanges in Parliament later this month when MPs debate two motions on the former Principal Auditor’s report for 2018/19.

In the run-up to the summer, and after days of intense exchanges on the findings in the report after it was laid in Parliament, the Chief Minister tabled a motion alleging political bias which the Government believes compromised the report’s accuracy and reliability.

the findings in the report after it was laid in Parliament, the Chief Minister tabled a motion alleging political bias which the Government believes compromised the report’s accuracy and reliability.

In response, Keith Azopardi, the Leader of the Opposition, tabled a motion of no confidence in the Chief Minister for what he described as an assault on democracy and an attempt to “trash” the report’s author.

That in turn left the Government to say it would amend the Opposition motion to turn it into one of no confidence in Mr Azopardi.

The audit report highlighted concerns ranging from claims of “improper and unconstitutional” behaviour by the Chief Minister to excessive overtime in the public service, “questionable” ex gratia payments, procurement transparency and issues of value for money.

The former Principal Auditor said on numerous occasions in the document that he did not receive responses to many of his queries over weeks and months, but the Government complained that many questions on complex matters were received late in the process and could not be easily and swiftly answered.

During the interview, Mr Picardo maintained his view that the report’s findings contained many errors and were designed to develop “a negative narrative” against the Government.

The aim of the motion, he said, was to ensure the Government’s position was reflected on the parliamentary record, given audit reports are laid in Parliament.

“The Government itself is constitutionally independent and is obliged to defend the things it has done with public money,” Mr Picardo said.

“And by doing so in a motion, it sets out its own view as to those issues without expunging the record.”

Mr Picardo said accusations that the motion was an abuse of the parliamentary process, given the Government’s in-built majority, amounted to “political criticism” that was “constitutionally and legally entirely nonsensical”.

“Because what is being suggested is that the motion, by being the expression of the Government’s view, somehow expunges the record in respect of the report laid,” he added.

“The report will remain on the record, but the Government’s narrative on it will also be on the record.”

“There cannot be anything wrong with that.”

“And anybody who thinks that there is, doesn’t understand British parliamentary practice or Gibraltar parliamentary practice, and makes the criticism in a way that denies our democratic right.”

“It would not be a parliament if the Principal Auditor, whoever he or she may be, had an inbuilt last word which could not be contradicted by motion by the Government.”

‘INNATE FAIRNESS’

The Chief Minister repeated earlier statements that he intended to go through factual and economic detail that the Government says is missing from the audit report and which, in its view, provides explanations for many of the concerns raised within it.

And he underlined that there had been no criticism of the 2018/19 Government accounts in the report, with the concerns highlighted by the former Principal Auditor arising primarily from ‘Value for Money’ audits relating to later years.

Mr Picardo acknowledged the wide concern in the community generated by the findings of the report and media coverage at the time of its publication.

But he also expressed confidence that people would understand the Government’s position on deeper analysis.

“I believe that the people of Gibraltar understand that we shouldn’t be making judgments based on headlines, that we need to go into substance,” he said.

“That’s not popular in the modern world, where everything is just a moment or 30 seconds of video, and getting across the substance of how government works and how government resolves issues on matters relating to payments to individuals etc is not something that can be done in a moment.”

“Now, if the public are ready to listen, they will be able to understand how things have been done properly.”

“If the public just wants to make up its mind based on headlines, then it’s not the Gibraltar I know.”

“The Gibraltar I know is not a kangaroo court.”

“I have confidence in the Gibraltarian and the Gibraltarians’ innate fairness because of the fairness that we seek from the rest of the world for us, and how we seek to draw the world’s attention to the detail of our case, and how we translate that into how we make assessments about the way that we run ourselves.”

Mr Picardo said the fact he and his government had been elected in four consecutive elections showed many people clearly had trust in him, even if others were “sick of the sight of me because I’ve been around for so long”.

And he rejected Opposition arguments, set out by Mr Azopardi in a pre-summer interview with this newspaper, that the audit report reflected concerns highlighted for many years by the GSD about financial waste and abuse.

REFORMS?

In the interview, Mr Azopardi had spoken of the need for reforms to ensure that any payments or contracts involving any person with links to the governing party were independently and transparently assessed without the involvement of ministers.

Mr Azopardi said people belong to, Sir Bob said he had chosen it to symbolise that connection and the many friendships with Gibraltarians that he had enjoyed over the years.

A former chair of the Commons justice committee, he reflected on the common law heritage that Gibraltar shared with the UK and which was one of its “great selling points” to the world, “one of the things that brings the British family together”.

Gibraltar, he said, was “a home from home”.

Sir Bob recognised too the (Continued from front page) turbulent years following the 2016 Brexit referendum, and understood the often-nuanced detail.

The conferment followed a motion tabled by the Chief Minister last year and passed with unanimous support across the chamber.

wing the 2016 Brexit referendum, and understood the often-nuanced detail.

The conferment followed a motion tabled by the Chief Minister last year and passed with unanimous support across the chamber.

It was bestowed on Sir Bob during a ceremony in City Hall attended by dignitaries from across Gibraltarian society, including the Governor, Lieutenant General Sir Ben Bathurst, Chief Minister Fabian Picardo and Keith Azopardi, the Leader of the Opposition.

Also present were Sir Bob’s wife, Ann Louise, and his sister and brother-in-law, as well as visiting UK parliamentarians currently in Gibraltar for National Day.

The Freedom of the City, Gibraltar’s highest honour, was presented to Sir Bob by the Deputy Mayor, Nicky Guerrero.

Sir Bob, a barrister by profession and a seasoned politician, said he was “overwhelmed” by the occasion and “unusually struggling a little for words”.

Criminal investigation into the alleged “hacking and sabotage” of the National Security Centralised Intelligence System [NSCIS], and into an alleged conspiracy to defraud Bland, the private company that operates the system.

Those allegations were “denied and roundly rejected” by lawyers for the Government parties, who said Mr McGrail retired because he knew he had lost the confidence not just of Chief Minister Fabian Picardo but, crucially, of the then interim Governor, Nick Pyle, who was the only person with the power to ask him to resign.

Sir Peter Openshaw will deliver his report to the Government, which will then publish it.

Asked how he felt about that prospect, Mr Picardo replied: “As confident as I always have.” “I know what I did, why I did it, and I know that what I did was right.”

“Whether a third party agrees with me or not doesn’t change that.”

Circumstances for former police Commissioner Ian McGrail’s early retirement in June 2020, after a 36-year career and halfway through his term in the top post at the RGP.

During the Inquiry, Mr McGrail’s lawyers alleged “misconduct and corruption” at the highest levels of Government, insisting Mr McGrail was “muscled out” after being placed under huge pressure over the conduct of Operation Delhi, a patronage and financial abuse by a Government which the GSD has for years accused of opaque practices and a resistance to accountability.

But the Chief Minister said that analysis ignored that many of the contentious payments and contracts identified in the audit report were about reducing liabilities to the Government and followed legal advice and close scrutiny by officials.

“If you want, as Leader of the Opposition, to make out a narrative that things are wrong and you are the one who is going to deliver the cure, you can do that,” Mr Picardo said. “But that’s to ignore that the thing that you are prescribing as the cure is already inbuilt in the mechanism and has already been applied, and that what you’re seeing is the fruit of that prescription and cure already.” “But that doesn’t suit you as a narrative, as a Leader of the Opposition, because that doesn’t get you a headline.”

He said the Opposition were “bloody minded” about their approach to politics, launching “visceral” attacks on the Government that in turn triggered equally visceral responses. “I’ve been in Opposition, I’ve been bloody minded about the way I’ve gone about things,” he said. “Because when you’re in Opposition, whatever anyone tells you, your main and overarching goal is to get into government...”

And he added: “[The Government] is obliged and wishes to defend its record because every step it’s taken, it’s taken in the defence of its electoral mandate and ensuring that we administer public money entirely properly, as I will show during the course of…”

The GSLP/Liberals are approaching the midway point of the current administration, nearly two years after the last general election in October 2023.

Reflecting on both the forthcoming Inquiry report and the row over the 2018/19 audit report against the backdrop of Brexit and the treaty negotiation, Mr Picardo urged people to step back and analyse the wider context. “[The treaty negotiation] is by far the most important issue facing the people of Gibraltar in generations compared to these issues,” he said.

“And the community would fail to understand the gravity of the situation facing us and the value of the opportunity that we have if it put any of the other issues that you’ve mentioned anywhere near the scale of what we’re dealing with in the treaty.”

“And from what people tell me...the public, to use your terms, understand the relative scale of all of these things.”

Mr Picardo has made clear that this will be his last term in frontline politics.

Sitting in the cabinet room in No.6 Convent Place, the Chief Minister would not be drawn on questions related to who will succeed him as party leader when he steps down. That is a matter for the GSLP, he said.

But he indicated how the process will unfold when the day comes for him to step down. “I made a commitment to the people of Gibraltar that if I was elected as their Chief Minister, I would see through this term,” Mr Picardo said. “The overwhelming issue for me is the negotiation – which is not yet complete – ratification and implementation of the UK EU treaty.”

“I will not leave, and I will not countenance leaving, until that has been dealt with.” “And that, I think, unfortunately, is going to take the lion’s share of the rest of this term.”

UK EU treaty.”

“I will not leave, and I will not countenance leaving, until that has been dealt with.” “And that, I think, unfortunately, is going to take the lion’s share of the rest of this term.”

The Chief Minister made clear that should that process spill into the next Parliament, “then somebody else will have to finalise it” because he had no plans to stand as a candidate in the next general election. “When the day comes that I decide is the day of my final resignation as Chief Minister – and I think I know the date in the calendar already in that respect, and I’ve had it fixed very clearly in my mind for some time – then on that day, I will hand in my resignation to His Excellency the Governor and I will advise him either that another person, to be determined by the party that I have led until then, enjoys the confidence of the majority of members of the Parliament, or, depending on other external political circumstances, that he should issue a writ for a general election.”