=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Source Name: PART THREE ECONOMY AND TRADE (DRAFT AGREEMENT IN RESPECT OF GIBRALTAR BETWEEN THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, OF THE ONE PART, AND THE EUROPEAN UNION)
Source Date: 2026-02-26
Source Link: https://treaty-gov.info/
Created At:  2026-02-26T11:04:52.315Z
Qdrant ID:   1772103891756
Chunks:      4
========================
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
236
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
PART THREE
ECONOMY AND TRADE
TITLE I
LEVEL PLAYING FIELD FOR OPEN AND FAIR COMPETITION
AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
ARTICLE 199
Principles and objectives
1. The Parties recognise that trade and investment between the Union and the United Kingdom,
in respect of Gibraltar, under the terms set out in this Agreement, require conditions that ensure a
level playing field for open and fair competition between the Parties and that ensure that trade and
investment take place in a manner conducive to sustainable development.
2. The Parties recognise that sustainable development encompasses economic development,
social development and environmental protection, all three being interdependent and mutually
reinforcing, and affirm their commitment to promoting the development of international trade and
investment in a way that contributes to the objective of sustainable development.
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
237
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
3. Each Party reaffirms its ambition of achieving economy-wide climate neutrality by 2050.
4. The Parties affirm their common understanding that their economic relationship, as it pertains
to Gibraltar, can only deliver benefits in a mutually satisfactory way if the commitments relating to
a level playing field for open and fair competition stand the test of time, by preventing distortions of
trade or investment, and by contributing to sustainable development. The Parties are determined to
maintain and improve their respective high standards in the areas covered by this Title.
5. The Specialised Committee on Economy and Trade may include additional areas or lay down
higher standards than those referred to in paragraph 4 with a view to ensuring the maintenance of a
level playing field between the Parties over time.
ARTICLE 200
Right to regulate, precautionary principle
and scientific and technical information
1. The Parties affirm the right of each Party to set its policies and priorities in the areas covered
by this Title, to determine the levels of protection it deems appropriate and to adopt or modify its
law and policies in a manner consistent with each Party's international commitments, including its
commitments under this Title.
2. The Parties acknowledge that, in accordance with the precautionary principle, where there are
reasonable grounds for concern that there are potential threats of serious or irreversible damage to
the environment or human health, the lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason
for preventing a Party from adopting appropriate measures to prevent such damage.
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
238
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
3. When preparing or implementing measures aimed at protecting the environment or labour
conditions that may affect trade or investment, each Party shall take into account relevant and
available scientific and technical information, international standards, guidelines and
recommendations.
CHAPTER 2
STATE AID CONTROL
ARTICLE 201
Substantive rules
1. This Chapter and Annex 18 apply to state aid granted by the United Kingdom, in respect of
Gibraltar, to one or more economic actors that:
(a) produce, transform or supply goods and the aid has, or could have, an effect on trade or
investment between the Union and Gibraltar; or
(b) are engaged in the provision of services insofar as the aid has, or could have, an effect on
trade in goods or investment between the Union and Gibraltar.
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
239
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
2. The Union is committed to maintaining its State aid control system in accordance with
Articles 93, 106, 107 and 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, applying it,
where relevant, to any aid that has, or could have, an effect on trade in goods or investment between
the Union and Gibraltar.
ARTICLE 202
Exceptions
This Chapter does not apply to state aid:
(a) covered by Part IV or Annex 2 of the Agreement on Agriculture, part of Annex 1A to the
WTO Agreement;
(b) related to trade in fish and fish products; or
related to the audio-visual sector.
ARTICLE 203
Transparency
1. With respect to any state aid granted or maintained within its territory, each Party shall within
six months from the granting of the state aid make publicly available, on an official website or a
public database, the following information:
(a) the legal basis and policy objective or purpose of the state aid;
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
240
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
(b) the name of the recipient of the state aid where available;
(c) the date of the grant of the state aid, the duration of the state aid and any other time limits
attached to the state aid; and
(d) the amount of the state aid or the amount budgeted for the state aid.
2. For state aid in the form of tax measures, information shall be made public within one year
from the date the tax declaration is due. The transparency obligations for state aid in the form of tax
measures concern the same information as listed in paragraph 1, except for the information required
under point (d) of that paragraph, which may be provided as a range.
3. The obligations in this Article are without prejudice to the obligations of the Parties under
their respective laws concerning the freedom of information or access to documents.
ARTICLE 204
Use of state aid
Each Party shall ensure that economic actors use state aid only for the specific purpose for which it
is granted.
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
241
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
ARTICLE 205
Independent authority and cooperation
1. Each Party shall establish or maintain an operationally independent authority or body with an
appropriate role in its state aid control system. That independent authority or body shall have the
necessary guarantees of independence in exercising its operational functions and shall act
impartially.
2.

riate role in its state aid control system. That independent authority or body shall have the
necessary guarantees of independence in exercising its operational functions and shall act
impartially.
2. Each Party shall ensure that any intended measure to grant or alter state aid is notified to their
respective independent authority or body and that such intended measure is not put into effect
before the independent authority or body has authorised it.
3. A Party may exempt certain categories of state aid from the obligations laid down in the
second paragraph, provided that such exemptions are transparent and based on objective criteria
such as, but not limited to, the size of the beneficiaries and quantitative thresholds. In the case of the
United Kingdom, in respect of Gibraltar, such exemptions shall comply with Annex 18.
4. Each Party shall ensure that its independent authority or body has the power to order recovery
of any state aid granted without prior authorisation by the independent authority or body.
5. Each Party shall encourage its independent authority or body to cooperate with the other
Party's independent authority or body on issues of common interest within their respective
functions, including the application of Articles 201 to 204 as applicable, within the limits
established by their respective legal frameworks. The Parties, or their respective independent
authorities or bodies, may agree upon a separate framework regarding cooperation between those
independent authorities or bodies.
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
242
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
6. Paragraph 2 shall not apply to any intended measure to grant or alter state aid referred to in
Article 201 by an Act of the Gibraltar Parliament. The United Kingdom, in respect of Gibraltar,
shall ensure that any such intended measure is notified to its independent authority or body. The
United Kingdom, in respect of Gibraltar, shall ensure that its independent authority or body has the
power to issue an opinion on any such intended measure. The United Kingdom, in respect of
Gibraltar, shall have regard to such an opinion and, where applicable, propose amendments to the
Act in question for the Gibraltar Parliament to consider.
7. Paragraph 4 shall not apply to any measure to grant or alter state aid referred to in Article 201
by an Act of the Gibraltar Parliament. The United Kingdom, in respect of Gibraltar, shall ensure
that its independent authority or body has the power to issue an opinion on any such measure. The
United Kingdom, in respect of Gibraltar, shall have regard to such an opinion and, where
applicable, propose amendments to the Act in question for the Gibraltar Parliament to consider.
ARTICLE 206
Courts and Tribunals
1. Each Party shall ensure that, in accordance with its constitutional order, its courts or tribunals
are competent to:
(a) review decisions on state aid taken by a granting authority or, where relevant, the independent
authority or body, in accordance with its state aid control system;
(b) review any other relevant decisions of the independent authority or body and any relevant
failure to act;
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
243
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
(c) impose remedies that are effective, in relation to point (a) or (b), including the suspension,
prohibition or requirement of action by the granting authority, the award of damages, and the
recovery of a state aid from its beneficiary with interest.
(d) hear claims from interested parties in respect of state aid where that interested party has
standing to bring a claim in respect of a state aid under that Party's law.
2. For the purposes of this Article and Article 207, "interested party" means any natural or legal
person, economic actor or association of economic actors whose interest might be affected by the
granting of a state aid, in particular the beneficiary, economic actors competing with the beneficiary
or relevant trade associations.
3. Point (c) of paragraph 1 shall not apply to any measure to grant or alter state aid referred to in
Article 201 on the basis of an Act of the Gibraltar Parliament save that, if a court or tribunal is
satisfied that such aid is incompatible with this Agreement, it may make a declaration of that
incompatibility. The United Kingdom, in respect of Gibraltar, shall have regard to such a
declaration and propose amendments to the Act in question for the Gibraltar Parliament to consider
or take other appropriate steps, where applicable.
ARTICLE 207
Recovery
1. Each Party shall have in place an effective mechanism of recovery in respect of state aid in
accordance with the following provisions, without prejudice to the power of the independent
authority or body as set out in Article 205 and other remedies that exist in that Party's law.
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
244
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
2. Without prejudice to paragraph 3, each Party shall ensure that, provided that an interested
party has challenged a decision of that Party to grant state aid before a court or a tribunal within the
relevant time period, in accordance with that Party's state aid control system, recovery may be
ordered if a court or tribunal of that Party makes a finding of a material error of law or fact, in that:
(a) a measure constituting state aid was not treated by the granting authority as a state aid;
(b) the granting authority has not complied with the relevant state aid control system that binds it;
or
(c) the granting authority has, by deciding to grant that state aid, acted outside the scope of its
powers or misused those powers in accordance with this Chapter.
3. Each Party shall suspend payment of any new state aid to a beneficiary until the aid granted to
that beneficiary, in respect of which an order for recovery has been made, has been fully recovered,
including any recovery interests due.
4.

ny new state aid to a beneficiary until the aid granted to
that beneficiary, in respect of which an order for recovery has been made, has been fully recovered,
including any recovery interests due.
4. In accordance with Articles 205(6) and (7) and 206(3), recovery of a state aid shall not be
required where such aid is granted or altered on the basis of an Act of the Gibraltar Parliament.
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
245
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
ARTICLE 208
Consultations
1. If a Party considers that state aid has been granted by the other Party or that there is clear
evidence that the other Party intends to grant state aid and that the granting of the state aid has or
could have a negative effect on trade in goods or investment between the Parties, it may request the
other Party to provide an explanation of how this Agreement has been respected with regard to that
state aid.
2. A Party may also request the information listed in Article 203 to the extent that the
information has not already been made publicly available on an official website or a public database
as referred to in Article 203, or to the extent that the information has not been made available in an
easily and readily accessible manner.
3. The other Party shall provide the requested information in writing no later than 45 days from
receipt of the request. If any requested information cannot be provided, that Party shall explain the
absence of such information in its written response.
4. If, after receiving the information requested, the requesting Party still considers that the state
aid granted or intended to be granted by the other Party has or could have a negative effect on trade
in goods or investment between the Parties, the requesting Party may request consultations within
the Specialised Committee on Economy and Trade. The request shall be in writing and shall include
an explanation of the requesting Party's reasons for requesting the consultation.
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
246
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
5. The Specialised Committee on Economy and Trade shall make every attempt to arrive at a
mutually satisfactory resolution of the matter. It shall hold its first meeting within 30 days of the
request for consultation.
6. The timeframes for the consultations referred to in paragraphs 3 and 5 may be extended by
agreement between the Parties.
ARTICLE 209
Remedial measures
1. A Party may deliver to the other Party a written request for information and consultations
regarding a state aid that it considers causes, or there is a serious risk that it will cause, a significant
negative effect on trade in goods or investment between the Parties. The requesting Party should
provide in that request all relevant information to enable the Parties to find a mutually acceptable
solution, including a description of the state aid and the concerns of the requesting Party regarding
its effect on trade in goods or investment.
2. No later than 30 days from the date of delivery of the request, the requested Party shall deliver
a written response providing the requested information to the requesting Party, and the Parties shall
enter into consultations, which shall be deemed concluded 60 days from the date of delivery of that
request, unless the Parties agree otherwise. Such consultations, and in particular all information
designated as confidential and positions taken by the Parties during consultations, shall be
confidential and shall be without prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further proceedings.
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
247
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
3. No earlier than 60 days from the date of delivery of the request referred to in paragraph 1, the
requesting Party may unilaterally take appropriate remedial measures if there is evidence that a state
aid of the requested Party causes, or there is a serious risk that it will cause, a significant negative
effect on trade in goods or investment between the Parties.
4. No earlier than 45 days from the date of delivery of the request referred to in paragraph 1, the
requesting Party shall notify the requested Party of the remedial measures that it intends to take in
accordance with paragraph 3. The requesting Party shall provide all relevant information in relation
to the measures that it intends to take to enable the Parties to find a mutually acceptable solution.
The requesting Party may not take those remedial measures earlier than 15 days from the date of
delivery of the notification of those measures to the requested Party.
5. A Party's assessment of the existence of a serious risk of a significant negative effect shall be
based on facts and not merely on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility. The change in
circumstances that would create a situation in which the state aid would cause such a significant
negative effect must be clearly predictable.
6. A Party's assessment of the existence of a state aid or of a significant negative effect on trade
in goods or investment between the Parties caused by the state aid shall be based on reliable
evidence and not merely on conjecture or remote possibility, and shall relate to identifiable goods or
economic actors, including, if relevant, in the case of state aid schemes.
7. The Specialised Committee on Trade and Economy may maintain an illustrative list of what
would amount to a significant negative effect on trade in goods or investment between the Parties
within the meaning of this Article. This shall be without prejudice to the right of the Parties to take
remedial measures.
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
248
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
8. The remedial measures taken pursuant to paragraph 3 shall be restricted to what is strictly
necessary and proportionate in order to remedy the significant negative effect caused or to address
the serious risk of such an effect. Priority shall be given to measures that will least disturb the
functioning of this Agreement.
9.

der to remedy the significant negative effect caused or to address
the serious risk of such an effect. Priority shall be given to measures that will least disturb the
functioning of this Agreement.
9. Within five days from the date on which the remedial measures referred to in paragraph 3
enter into effect and without having prior recourse to consultations in accordance with Article 304,
the notified Party may request, in accordance with Article 305(2), the establishment of an
arbitration tribunal by means of a written request delivered to the requesting Party in order for the
arbitration tribunal to decide whether:
(a) a remedial measure taken by the requesting Party is inconsistent with paragraphs 3 or 5;
(b) the requesting Party did not participate in the consultations after the requested Party delivered
the requested information and agreed to the holding of such consultations; or
(c) there was a failure to take or notify a remedial measure in accordance with the time periods
referred to in paragraph 3 or 4 respectively.
That request shall not have a suspensive effect on the remedial measures. Furthermore, the
arbitration tribunal shall not assess the application by a Party of its state aid control system.
10. The arbitration tribunal established following the request referred to in paragraph 9 shall
conduct its proceedings in accordance with Article 327 and deliver its final ruling within 30 days
from its establishment.
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
249
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
11. In the case of a finding against the respondent Party, the respondent Party shall, at the
latest 30 days from the date of delivery of the ruling of the arbitration tribunal, deliver a notification
to the complaining Party of any measure that it has taken to comply with that ruling.
12. Following a finding against the respondent Party in the procedure referred to in paragraph 10
of this Article, the complaining Party may request the arbitration tribunal, within 30 days from its
ruling, to determine a level of suspension of obligations under this Agreement or a supplementing
agreement not exceeding the level equivalent to the nullification or impairment caused by the
application of the remedial measures, if it finds that the inconsistency of the remedial measures with
paragraph 3 or 8 of this Article is significant. The request shall propose a level of suspension of
obligations in accordance with the principles set out in Article 316. The complaining Party may
suspend obligations under this Agreement or a supplementing agreement in accordance with the
level of suspension of obligations determined by the arbitration tribunal. Such suspension shall not
be applied sooner than 15 days following such ruling.
13. A Party shall not invoke the WTO Agreement or any other international agreement to
preclude the other Party from taking measures pursuant to this Article, including where those
measures consist in the suspension of obligations under this Agreement or a supplementing
agreement.
14. For the purposes of assessing whether imposing or maintaining remedial measures on imports
of the same product is restricted to what is strictly necessary or proportionate for the purposes of
this Article, a Party:
(a) shall take into account countervailing measures applied or maintained in accordance with the
requirements of the SCM Agreement and pursuant to a fair and transparent process; and
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
250
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
(b) may take into account anti-dumping measures applied or maintained in accordance with the
requirements of the Anti-Dumping Agreement and pursuant to a fair and transparent process.
15. If the Party against which remedial measures were taken does not submit a request pursuant to
paragraph 9 within the time period laid down in that paragraph, that Party may initiate the
arbitration procedure referred to in Article 305 to challenge a remedial measure on the grounds set
out in paragraph 9 without having prior recourse to consultations in accordance with Article 304.
An arbitration tribunal shall treat the issue as a case of urgency for the purpose of Article 310.
16. For the purposes of the proceedings under paragraph 9 or 15, in assessing whether a remedial
measure is strictly necessary or proportionate, the arbitration tribunal shall pay due regard to the
principles set out in paragraphs 5, 6 and 13.
ARTICLE 210
Dispute settlement
1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 3, Title I of Part Six applies to disputes between the Parties
concerning the interpretation and application of this Chapter, except for Articles 205 and 206.
2. An arbitration tribunal shall have no jurisdiction regarding:
(a) an individual state aid measure, including whether such a measure has complied with the
relevant Party's state aid control system; and
DRAFT – SUBJECT TO LEGAL REVIEW
251
OFFICIAL - FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
(b) whether the recovery remedy within the meaning of Article 207 has been correctly applied in
any individual case.
3. Title I of Part Six shall apply to Article 209 in accordance with that Article and Article 327.