=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Source Name: GBC NEWS Reassuring' that work underway on treaty arrangements at airport, says Morton
Source Date: 2025-12-17
Source Link: https://www.gbc.gi/news/reassuring-that-work-underway-on-treaty-arrangements-at-airport-says-morton
Created At:  2025-12-17T14:27:04.364Z
Qdrant ID:   1765981623206
Chunks:      1
========================
GBC Interview with Wendy Morton

The Shadow Minister for Europe says it is "reassuring" that work is well underway on the practical arrangements to be put in place at the airport as part of the EU relationship treaty.

Wendy Morton said, however, that as part of the Opposition, she has yet to see the actual detail of the treaty, and will need to examine this when it comes out. 

During her visit to the Rock, she's met with Government ministers and business representatives. 

Christina Cortes spoke to her.

This is not my first visit to Gibraltar, and I think it's important to recognise that it's probably about my fourth or even fifth visit. I was really keen to come back and to get an understanding of some of the practical arrangements that are starting to be put in place here at the airport.

Yesterday I was given a tour of the airport, around where the new border controls are going to be. You can read about something, you can see a diagram, but nothing really beats coming and seeing it. And I appreciate there is still work ongoing and there's still the legal detail of the deal being worked up, but I was really, really pleased to see what I saw yesterday.

Q: What do you make of the arrangements that have been put in place, then?
A: Well, obviously I saw the practical side of things. What I haven’t seen, because I’m an opposition minister, is the actual detail of the treaty. So I think it's important that when that comes out, I can look at it. There may be points—there probably will be—that I’ll be looking for some clarity on and some detail. But what I saw yesterday was actually really reassuring: that the work has begun, it’s well underway, and things are being put in place so that when those flights land, people know what the process is and the way through customs.

The one thing I’ve learned over the years of travelling to Gibraltar is that the flow of people and the flow of goods is really important—making sure things go as smoothly as possible.

Q: There have been hardline Brexit elements in the Conservative Party who’ve proposed measures that would bring greater alignment with the EU. Does the Conservative Party as a whole support this treaty for the Rock, from the feedback you’ve had?
A: I think it's really important to remember that in the early stages of this, it was our party that started those negotiations. We've obviously got a new government in place, and fundamentally I have not seen the legal detail. So it would be unfair of me to comment on the actual detail. The most important thing is to make sure that what is put in place works for the benefit of Gibraltar. And you know, there are four parties in this: the UK, Gibraltar, the EU and Spain. But there are also the passengers and the goods that need to move as freely as possible under the new arrangements within the scope of the Brexit deal that was done a number of years ago.

Q: During your visit, you've met representatives of the business sector as well as political representatives. What feedback have you had?
A: Again, the key thing is that the business sector wants something that will work. They want certainty. They are keen to see the detail as soon as possible so they understand what it means for them. I met with the FSB and the Chamber yesterday. I also met with the gambling sector. So getting the detail is the next stage, which those of us who are not part of the Government have to wait for.

Q: With regard to the gaming sector, what do you make of the UK Government’s measures regarding gaming tax—perceived by some on the Rock as contradicting the Government’s commitment to supporting the Overseas Territories?
A: I was really staggered, actually, when I sat in the Chamber in the House of Commons and heard the announcement on taxation. It feels very much like the sector is being really whacked, and it does leave me concerned. Obviously we’ll have to see how it plays out, but my big worry is the impact on the economy here in Gibraltar, and I really fear it will drive some people to the black market, which is not in anybody’s interest.

Alongside that, there is a debate about gambling and gaming—you’ve got people who are pro it and people who are against it. What I learned yesterday speaking to the organisations is the importance of safeguards in the gambling industry, and those are really, really important to maintain and should be acknowledged as well. So yes, I was staggered.

