=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Source Name: HMGOG PR CM Statement to Parliament on the treaty - 465/2025
Source Date: 2025-06-23
Source Link: https://www.gibraltar.gov.gi/press-releases/cm-statement-to-parliament-on-the-treaty-4652025-10995
Created At:  2025-12-09T08:26:08.045Z
Qdrant ID:   1765268767910
Chunks:      2
========================
Circulation of goods

 

Madam Speaker, the second pillar of the treaty will be a trade agreement that will allow the free flow of goods between Gibraltar and the EU’s Customs Union.

 

All goods imported into Gibraltar will be cleared by an EU customs point that shall be designated in the treaty.

 

These will include customs points in La Linea and in Algeciras.

 

Once imported into Gibraltar those goods will be in free circulation here subject only to the payment of the transaction tax.

 

The transaction tax will effectively replace the current import duty regime that will disappear.

 

It is not a VAT.

 

EU VAT rules will NOT apply in Gibraltar.

 

A formula has been agreed whereby Gibraltar will not apply a rate of transaction tax that is lower than the rate of VAT applied by any EU Member State.

 

That currently stands at 17% in Luxembourg.

 

We will not move to that rate immediately, but an escalator will be agreed to get us there after a number of years.

 

A mechanism will also be established whereby a panel of experts will annually assess the effect of the progressive rates being implemented.

 

Some goods will benefit from a reduced rate of 5% or no transaction tax at all.

 

For instance, children’s clothing can be rated at 5% TT, Foodstuffs at 0% TT, Pharmaceuticals at 0% TT and Medical equipment at 0% TT.

 

Special customs procedures will also exist, whereby goods brought into Gibraltar but not sold in Gibraltar will benefit from certain exemptions including the non-payment of the transaction tax.

 

This will cover bunkering, motor vehicles and ship supplies thereby protecting these important sectors of our economy.

 

Traders purchasing goods in Spain or elsewhere in the EU will be able to do so VAT-free.

 

They will then have to pay the relevant transaction tax when they import those goods for sale in Gibraltar.

 

But there will not be double taxation.

 

On the other hand, individuals purchasing goods in Spain or elsewhere in the EU will pay the VAT on those goods and will not be able to obtain a VAT refund.

 

Our traders will be able to sell their goods to all those coming to Gibraltar with no restrictions or allowances for so long as such goods are for their own personal use.

 

They will also be able to sell their goods in the EU without the restrictions that have existed in the past and, notably, without having to pay customs duties when entering the EU customs territory.

 

With regard to third country goods, the EU’s Common Customs Tariff shall apply.

 

This will not, however, apply to goods which are of UK origin.

 

This is a consequence of the customs arrangements we are establishing with the EU under the treaty and the fact that, under the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement, no tariffs apply on UK goods being imported into the EU.

 

 

Other parts of the treaty

 

Madam Speaker, those are the main pillars of the treaty.

 

But the treaty will also cover other important areas.

 

There will be provisions on Environmental protection, Climate Change, Labour and Social Standards, Frontier Workers and Transport.

 

With respect to air transport, the treaty will open up Gibraltar Airport to flights to and from airports in the European Union.

 

This means that, for the first time in our history, and directly as a result of these negotiations, we may see commercial flights operated between Gibraltar and places in the EU.

 

These arrangements therefore take us beyond the short-lived Cordoba arrangements which only provided for flights to Spain.

 

It is truly remarkable that we have been able to achieve this now that we are outside of the European Union and in a way which does not cross any of our red lines on sovereignty, jurisdiction or control.


We trust that this will put to rest an issue which has plagued Gibraltar’s political history ever since Spain first opposed Gibraltar’s participation in the EU single sky package of measures close to 40 years ago in 1987.

 

On that day, together with tens of thousands of our fellow citizens, I joined the demonstration to say NO to the then Airport Agreement.

 

What we have agreed crosses none of the concerns that all our people had then.

 

This area of policy and negotiation was ably led, Madam Speaker, by my dear friend the Deputy Chief Minister whose tenacity, understanding and skill on this issue was recognised by all around the table – not least and especially by those sitting opposite us as well as those sitting alongside us.

 

The Gibraltar Team

 

Madam Speaker, the Gibraltar team has been extraordinary in its ability, capacity and resilience.

 

I exclude myself when I say that Gibraltar should be proud of how its team has delivered in this negotiation.

 

The Deputy Chief Minster and all current and former Ministers, the Attorney General, our representative in Brussels, the Chief Secretary, the current and former Chief Secretaries, the current and former Financial Secretaries & Collectors of Customs, all have been more than equal to the tasks.

 

This has been hugely important work and they have all delivered.

 

As the conductor of the Gibraltar orchestra, my work has been to bring that work together but it is their work that must be recognised.

 

I could not have done my part without my magnificent team at No6 who put up with so much travel, so much inability to deal with the day-to-day because of the negotiation and so much diary upheaval as a result of the need to move at the last minute.

 

My deepest gratitude to all of them.

 

Indeed, I want thank all who have played a role in supporting me and the Deputy Chief Minister in this negotiation and leading us to what can only realistically be described as a very positive result for Gibraltar.

 

Madam Speaker, I acknowledge that in the absence of a final treaty text there will be many questions, of course.

what can only realistically be described as a very positive result for Gibraltar.

 

Madam Speaker, I acknowledge that in the absence of a final treaty text there will be many questions, of course.


Madam Speaker, the government set up an email address to receive the queries of citizens about the agreement.

 

That address UKEUTreaty@gibraltar.gov.gi has already received almost 1,000 emails. 


The Chief Secretary is already working to marshal responses to all queries and publish an FAQ based on the most frequently asked questions coming into that address.

 

Madam Speaker,

 

For all of the reasons above, I commend this statement and the agreement it refers to, to this House and to the People of Gibraltar.

 

ENDS