=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Source Name: Chamber of Commerce Treaty Briefing 
Source Date: 2026-02-04
Source Link: https://mcusercontent.com/8ae8b9e9030cb634f774e84cd/files/25e2231f-b560-fa69-64ee-281846c97aaa/Answers_to_Chamber_questions_040226.02.pdf
Created At:  2026-02-05T15:29:07.568Z
Qdrant ID:   1770305346493
Chunks:      4
========================
Chamber of Commerce Treaty Briefing
Below are the answers received from the Government in response to the questions submitted by the Chamber of Commerce of behalf of its members.
These were received after the briefing given at Grand Battery House on 4th February 2026

Port
Will the Port continue to operate as it does currently once the Treaty comes into effect
on 10th April 2026?
Certain operations will continue as normal, including in relation to bunkering and ship supplies.
Other operations will change, including that goods can only be imported into the port if they
have first been cleared in the Port of Algeciras.
Will ships spares continue to be able to be imported in transit once the Treaty comes
into force?
Yes. The treaty contains specific provisions on ship supplies which protects this industry.
How will crew changes for merchant ships be affected by the Treaty? What mechanisms
will be in place and when will the details be made public?
As is the case today, crew members disembarking in Gibraltar or embarking in Gibraltar will
be subject to immigration controls. To supplement facilitations already afforded by Schengen
legislation to crew members, specific arrangements have also been agreed with respect to
visa exemptions.
Will there be any restrictions on cruise ships calling at Gibraltar once the Treaty comes
into effect?
It will not be possible for cruise ships to arrive in Gibraltar from a non-Schengen/non-UK port.
Will ship spares and stores sent to Gibraltar from EU / UK be VAT exempt and classed
as “spares in transit” for duty free delivery to vessels?
Ship spares will continue to be able to be imported and delivered free of indirect tax.
Will Gibraltar Immigration / Borders & Coastguard be able to issue Schengen visas?
No.
Will Schengen visa requiring nationals such as Filipinos be able to transit Gib via UK
as per current crew travel arrangements?
As above.
If so in the case of potential for a diversion to Malaga will crew be allowed to remain
onboard?
Because of the visa exemptions agreed, there should be no need for crew to be returned to
the UK in case of a diversion to Malaga.
Will private yachts be able to take duty free fuel?
Exemptions from VAT and excise which exist under EU law will apply equally to Gibraltar
transaction tax and Gibraltar excise. These apply to commercial vessels and It is understood
that there can be circumstances in which private yachts taking on fuel do so in a commercial
context.
Will Gibraltar still be considered as being outside the EU for customs and VAT
purposes for the reset of a yacht’s 18-month EU temporary importation status?
Gibraltar will not be joining the customs territory of the EU or the EU VAT area. Gibraltar will
continue to be considered as a third country for all purposes including this one.
Will all yacht crew be required to be processed in the Schengen shack even if they were
not planning on coming ashore? Is that the same for any commercial vessels coming
alongside?
Derogations exist under Schengen legislation which allow for seafarers and crew to not have
to be physically processed at border crossing points even if such persons come ashore.
Will nationals (seafarers with seaman’s discharge book) with no Schengen visa (e.g.
South Africans) arriving to Gibraltar onboard a yacht be permitted ashore?
As above.

en if such persons come ashore.
Will nationals (seafarers with seaman’s discharge book) with no Schengen visa (e.g.
South Africans) arriving to Gibraltar onboard a yacht be permitted ashore?
As above.

Customs Procedures
Will Gibraltar be able to issue transit documents in Gibraltar which will not need to have
customs agents in La Linea?
A specific transit regime has been set up to govern how goods will move, in transit, from the
designated customs posts (including the one in La Linea) to Gibraltar. Transit documents will
be issued and closed by either the EU customs authorities, or the Gibraltar customs authorities
depending on whether goods are being imported into Gibraltar or are being exported from
Gibraltar.
Will Gibraltar be part of the NCTS transport system?
Yes.
Will Gibraltar Customs have access to the NCTS system? If not, why not?
Yes, Gibraltar will have access to this system.
What IT systems will be used? Will Gibraltar connect to the UK’s system, the EU’s
system, or a new Gibraltar-specific platform?
There will be connectivity between Gibraltar customs IT systems and those of the EU.
Once the Treaty document is published in full will there also be guidance notes for
businesses which explain in more detail what measures they need to comply with?
Absolutely.
For businesses making purchases of goods in Spain (or elsewhere in the EU) what
information will Gibraltar businesses need to share with their suppliers (Gib companies
do not have IVA/VAT numbers but suppliers will not/are unable to fulfil an order without
this). When will this information be made public?
Further detailed, technical guidance on procedures will be issued in due course but for now
we can confirm that goods imported in commercial quantities from Spain or the EU for placing
on the market in Gibraltar will be able to be purchased EU VAT free.
Where will the information be published which can be sent to suppliers on what they
need to do to comply? Will this be in English as well as Spanish?
We can organise for any guidance to be translated into Spanish although it will also be the
case that Spanish suppliers will need to work with the Spanish customs authorities to correctly
implement the customs aspects of the agreement.
On the Spanish side of the border for goods arriving at Spain what formalities will be
needed/required.
Detailed guidance will be provided in due course. But the answer to this question will depend
on whether the goods arrive from the EU (in which case the formalities will mainly relate to the
opening of the Gibraltar transit process) or third countries (in which case the formalities will
relate to those which will need to be carried out in order to release the goods for free
circulation).
Will there be Forms of Attestation to confirm that the goods are EU compliant?
Detailed guidance answering procedure specific questions will be provided in due course.
Will this include rules and/or guidance on labelling requirements for each product?
Yes. In terms of labelling requirements, for products imported into Gibraltar, the labelling
requirements which apply to the manufacturers of those goods under EU law will apply. There
are then specific rules on labelling which apply to goods which can derogate from the general
rule on compliance with EU standards, namely: UK medicines for human use, UK medical
devices for use by the GHA and food that is produced in Gibraltar.
Can a truck arrive in Gibraltar with goods from EU and non-EU goods?
Yes. Under the treaty, a truck in the EU can only bring goods into Gibraltar if the goods are
picked up in the Campo or arriving from the UK.
At present we raise a T1 from UK port of exit (Folkstone/Dover) via first EU point of
entry (Calais) and finalising in the last EU point of exit (La Linea Spain):-
-what will be the new customs procedures for this route inclusive of what
documentation will be required
Procedures with respect to how goods transit from the UK port of exit to the EU designated
customs posts will not change. The only change will be a new transit regime from the EU
designated customs post to Gibraltar.
– Will UK guarantees be accepted?
If they are accepted today they will be accepted in future.
-how will the VAT and duty regime be applied for goods arriving from the UK ?
Non-UK origin goods arriving from the UK which are subject to EU customs duties will have
duties under the EU Common External Tariff applied to them. They will not be subject to VAT
but will be subject to Gibraltar transaction tax if placed on the market in Gibraltar. Goods which
are of UK origin will not be subject to customs duties.
-what will be the difference between goods arriving from the UK - B2B to B2C?
Guidance will be issued in due course but there should not be much difference in terms of the
procedures applied to goods arriving in Gibraltar from the UK, regardless of whether these are
B2B or B2C.
-Will duties applicable to UK exported goods be required to be paid at La Linea border
or Gibraltar customs border?
Customs duties will be collected at the EU designated customs posts. There are procedures
for these amounts to then be reimbursed to Gibraltar.
Right now, we have a customs bonded facility at our warehouse whereby such goods
awaiting payment of import duties are held pending customs clearance. Will this
process change?
There are detailed rules on special procedures, including with respect to the operation of
bonded stores. Generally, transaction tax (and excise duty where applicable) will not be due
on these goods until they are released from bond to be placed on the market in Gibraltar.
Ie will the trailers have to wait on the Spanish side until duties are settled, or will there
be a deferred payment type of system like there exists in the UK?
For goods placed in special customs procedures (e.g. bonded stores) it will not be necessary
for goods to be held up until indirect taxes are settled.

yment type of system like there exists in the UK?
For goods placed in special customs procedures (e.g. bonded stores) it will not be necessary
for goods to be held up until indirect taxes are settled. They will be able to move into Gibraltar.
With respect to other goods, goods for which transaction tax is not settled will not remain on
the Spanish side of the border but it will not be the case that the Gibraltar authorities will be
able to close the Gibraltar transit (and therefore release the goods in Gibraltar) until transaction
tax is settled.
What are the anticipated physical checks at the La Linea/Gibraltar border be for arriving
UK goods as opposed to arriving EU goods?
See above.
Will there be designated lanes for freight?
Yes.
Or will the trailers have to go to Algeciras for checks?
Checks can be carried out an any of the designated customs posts (i.e. also in La Linea) so it
will not be necessary for trailers to always have to go to Algeciras.
What Customs checks/formalities will be applied by Spanish Customs for import
/export cargo and where will the checks take place?
Detailed guidance with respect to formalities will be provided in due course. Checks will be
carried out in both the EU designated customs posts and in Gibraltar customs facilities (to, for
example, check that the goods which have arrived corresponded with those which have been
declared in transit declarations).
Can a truck enter/depart GIB with cargo combined from/to EU and non EU destinations?
Yes. The same conditions as above apply.
Where and how will checks for EU compliance take place for goods arriving from
outside the EU?
Checks for compliance with EU standards will take place at the designated customs posts or,
for SPS goods, at the first point of entry into the EU.
Cargo in transit via Spain currently moves under Customs form T1. For cargo departing
Gibraltar, will the T1 be issued by Gibraltar Customs and will the exporter be required
to lodge a bank guarantee in case the T1 is not discharged at EU exit point?
Cargo exported from Gibraltar will move from Gibraltar to the designated customs posts under
the specific Gibraltar transit regime. With respect to this leg of the movement, the Gibraltar
customs office will open the transit and issue any relevant documentation. Guarantees will be
required. EU transit rules will then apply to the second leg of the movement from the
designated customs post to the EU exit point.
UK exports to Gibraltar- Pharmaceuticals and Products of animal origin
What are the anticipated physical checks and documentary controls at the GibraltarSpain (La Linea/Algeciras) for goods to be imported into Gibraltar?
Detailed guidance will be provided in due course but, for now, to confirm that all goods
imported into Gibraltar will need to comply with EU standards subject to a number of specific
derogations applying to UK medical goods, UK medical devices which are for use by the GHA,
and to military goods.
What are the new licence, certification and pre-notification requirements for such
goods inclusive of labelling?
Specific labelling requirements will apply to UK medical goods and UK medical devices to
indicate that these goods are derogated goods which are for use in Gibraltar.
Specific labelling requirements will also apply to foods produced in Gibraltar or food imported
into Gibraltar (which complies with EU standards) but which is then processed or repacked in
Gibraltar by retail establishments.
Will sea freight services (currently being used to transit POAO) from the UK to Gibraltar
be able to continue?
Yes, provided these move via Algeciras and the UK POAO is imported into the EU prior to
being exported to Gibraltar.
If not, from what date will they cease?
New processes will commence from the date of entry into force of the agreement.
Transaction Tax, Excise, Tariffs & Quotas
When will the new tariff be published by HM Customs setting out the new transaction
tax for each category? Will this be available online for traders to check?
This will be published in due course but in time prior to the entry into force of the agreement.
It will be online for traders to check.
Will the existing tariff (0,3,6,12%) remain available online during the 2-month transition
period (10/4/26 – 10/6/26)?
No. The new transaction tax will generally apply to all goods imported into Gibraltar as from
the date of entry into force of the agreement. Derogations from the new indirect tax regime will
apply only in the very limited circumstances, and during the limited time periods, set out in
HMGoG’s Technical Notice (namely where the movement of the goods starts before the date
of entry into force of the agreement or where the goods are covered by an extant certificate of
exemption under Regulation 8, Part 3 of the Integrated Tariff Regulations 2017)
Will products made outside the EU which have already paid the tariff on entry into the
EU have to pay the tariff as well as the transaction tax on entry into Gibraltar?
Customs duties will be paid once at the EU designated customs post. These will not be
charged, again, by the Gibraltar customs authorities. The Gibraltar customs authorities will
only levy transaction tax on those goods.
Might there be methods of deferring payment of the Transaction tax to HM Customs if
the trader is long established/of good standing? When will this information be
available?
Payment of transaction tax will only be suspended if goods are placed in special customs
procedures.
Could there be quota system for larger local retailers in respect of preserving the import
arrangements? e.g. Morrisons etc in order to avoid the possibility of EU market
distortion as goods are only for domestic (i.e. within Gibraltar) consumption.
No.
Will Gibraltar now be subject to the EU quota system, ie.

orrisons etc in order to avoid the possibility of EU market
distortion as goods are only for domestic (i.e. within Gibraltar) consumption.
No.
Will Gibraltar now be subject to the EU quota system, ie. today we procure from our EU
partners and this does not affect their quota allowance for the goods they import from
outside the EU (which are subject to quotas) – under the Treaty/post 10th April, will
Gibraltar’s procurement volume then affect the volume our EU supply partners are
allowed to import into the EU?
No.
In addition to the transactional tax, can you confirm whether the minimum EU excise
rates will be applied in place of the existing duty rates on beers, wines, spirits and
HM Customs
Minimum EU excise duty rates will apply to alcohol products as from the date of entry into
force of the treaty.
With these new regulations, is there a risk that the unique British feel of Main Street
and of Gibraltar will be somewhat diluted?
We do not consider that this will be the case.
What is the expected timeline for the UK/EU reset for foodstuffs?
This is expected in 2027.
Would it be possible to have dispensation for Gibraltar to retain a degree of Britishness
for a period of 3 years?
No.
Can local wholesalers/retailers use bonded stores in Spain to draw down as and when
they need and thus avoid having to pay import duty all at once?
We do not see why Spanish bonded stores would need to be relied upon in circumstances
where goods placed in special customs procedures, in Gibraltar, will not have to pay
transaction tax until they are released from bond in order to be placed on the market in
Gibraltar.
Can existing resources be re-assigned to clamp down on enforcement of noncompliant/unlicensed/unregistered businesses and to ensure a level playing field is
maintained?
This concerns the supply of services in Gibraltar. The agreement does not impose any
obligations on Gibraltar with respect to the provision of cross border services. Gibraltar can
therefore regulate the provision of such services in Gibraltar as it deems fit.
Will the Inspection Force body to check on compliance with EU regulations have
powers of enforcement and will they be uniformed?
This will be led by the Gibraltar Office of Fair Trading. Officials will not be uniformed.
Assistance measures
When will the detailed, technical guidance manuals for freight forwarders and customs
brokers be published?
As soon as possible ahead of entry into force of the agreement.
Will there be a dedicated helpline or liaison unit for the logistics industry during the
transition? Currently, HM Customs rarely answer the phone and are very slow to
respond to email enquiries.
This is under consideration.
What training programmes or funding will be available to upskill local customs
declarants and freight staff?
This is also under consideration.
What is the official contingency plan if critical IT systems are not fully operational by
10th April 2026?
IT systems should be in place before the date of entry into force of the agreement.
Are there plans for transitional simplified procedures for the first 3-6 months to avoid border
chaos?
There are no transitional arrangements beyond those explained in HMGoG’s Technical Notice.